-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Testarudo the Turtle and Rauda the Rabbit agreed to race across the forest.
Rauda was as fast as her cousin the Hare, but unlike him, she was not lazy;
quite on the contrary, once she started running, she never stopped until she
reached her goal.  Testarudo, on the other hand, was as undefatigable as his
cousin the Tortoise, but more importantly, he was insistently conscientious,
and very perceptive.

The goal was set at clearing atop Mount Parnasse, and marked with a big fire
that sent a column of smoke skywards.  But no course was decided: the racers
would have to find their own way.

[ from here on, shaped typesetting ]

1111111111111111111111111111111111    3333333333333333333333333
                    2222222222   11         3333333333333
                  222222           111         3333333
                 2222         111               3333
                   2222            1111         3333
                 4444       111         111     5555
              4444               111            5555
                 4444       666                 5555
                    4444            666         5555
                4444         6666               5555
              8888                 6666         7777
     888                   666                   77
        888                         66           77
           888                            66     77

(1) The Crow gave the start signal and immediately flew up high into the sky,
to see the race from above. (2) Rauda darted away towards the goal.  (3)
Testarudo started off with a firm gait.

(4) Rauda was soon deep in the dense forest, where she couldn't see the column
of smoke, but she was confident she was on the right track.  She also made a
point of always choosing the steepest path upwards.  She would get to the fire
in no time.  And, assuredly, soon she was got out of the forest and could see
the summit a few dozen steps ahead.  But where were the fire and the column of
smoke?  She turned around and realised she hadn't come to the right mount.  So
she quickly got back in the forest, towards the goal.  Fearing another blunder,
she decided to stop to ask everyone she met where Mount Parnasse was, and every
time, she darted again in the reported direction.  At the back of her mind, she
had a nagging sensation that the animals' answers didn't quite agree, and she
had a feeling that she was going several times through the same patches of
forest.  But she was too much in a hurry to stop and verify; time was of the
essence!  Soon, she was near the goal.  Was she?  She got out of the forest
again, only to find that she was even farther away from the goal than the first
time.  Frustrated, she entered the forest once again.  She had lost so much
time...  She had to do something.  But what?  Run even faster, of course!
Thus, she reached many summits that were not Mount Parnasse; sometimes she was
nearer the goal and felt mildly relieved, but sometimes she was farther away
and felt truly frustrated.  After many attempts, she arrived at what she
thought, again, was the clearing around the goal.  But it wasn't, again!  What
was worse, when she looked around at the smoke column, she saw something
unexpected: Testarudo had just entered the correct clearing, and was inexorably
approaching the goal.  Quick!  There's no time to waste!  And off she darted
again, with all her might.

(5) Testarudo wasn't as fast as Rauda, by a long shot.  But being slower and
calmer afforded him more vision and more time to check and think.  Every few
steps, he checked his bearings and looked for landmarks.  If he could see some
light at the top of the forest roof, he would check its direction.  If he saw
some patch of forest with an open top, he would carefully deviate from his path
to get there, find the smoke column, and correct his course.  If he found a
high rock, he would climb atop it, even if it was a lot of effort, and check
his landmarks.  And he would ask every creature he encountered for the
direction to Mount Parnasse; in this respect, he soon realised the animals of
the forest were often unreliable, especially the smaller ones, so, although he
kept asking and taking into account their answers, especially those of the
bigger ones, he always assessed them against his own findings.  And thus, step
by step, always approaching the goal, he reached the clearing at the top of
Mount Parnasse.

(6) The crow, from his privileged vantage point, inaccessible to anyone else,
saw the two racers evolve.  He saw Testudo advancing slowly but steadily,
always approaching the goal.  Rauda's evolution was more surprising: she would
make good progress towards the goal, but soon she would deviate, or squarely
take a sharp bend, in a different direction, very often away from the goal;
then she would emerge from the forest, look for the goal, and dart again into
the forest.

(7) Rauda emerges from the forest into the river at high speed...

(8) Testudo reaches the goal...

(9) Is there a possibility Testarudo, Rauda, and the Mock Turtle join their
forces?...

Can i modify the tale so it isn't clear Testarudo won.  Like, in fact,
Testarudo and Rauda needed each other to win.

Don't forget:

    * Rauda is creative and fast; she moves in high-risk, high-yield domains;

    * Testarudo is conscientious and repeatable; his business is security and
      constant push forward;

    * the two of them together achieve sustained maximum speed with low risk of
      setbacks.

How about setting the tale in coloured ASCII-art panels, with text under each
panel.  When the panel is about several characters, there are several
character-specific columns of text that can be read in parallel.  In this
situation, Rauda should always be on the left, and Testarudo on the right,
because Rauda represents the possible current situation and Testarudo
represents the Testudo-based solution.  The text under each panel can also be
in ASCII-art, or it can be typeset by LaTeX (this will look better; and i could
even use different fonts for the different characters).

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Crow gave the start signal and immediately
                           flew up
Rauda darted away                high into the sky,     Testarudo started off
    towards tho goal.       to                            with a firm gait.
        She was soon             see                      He wasn't as fast
  deep in the dense                    the                as Rauda, by a long
     forest, where she                      race        shot.  But being slower
couldn't see the column         from                    and calmer afforded him
       of smoke                      above.             more vision & more time
                                                          to check and think.
                             From his vantage point,
                           inaccessible to anyone else,
                          he saw the two racers evolve.

                                       Testudo avanced
                                  slowly but steadily,
                                    always approaching
                                             the goal.

                          Rauda started fast
                          towards the goal
                          but deviated or
                          took sharp bends,
                          often away from
                          the goal.
